---
title: "Forschungszentrum Jülich — 德国超算中心 — jsc"
source_url: "https://www.fz-juelich.de/en/ias/jsc"
source_type: "multilingual"
source_org: "julich"
source_name: "Forschungszentrum Jülich — 德国超算中心"
original_lang: "en"
credibility: 5
lifecycle: "latest"
synced_date: 2026-04-29
region: "eu"
country: "de"
---

Jülich Supercomputing Centre (JSC) Skip to main content Skip to navigation Skip to footer de   en   Institute Jülich Supercomputing Centre (JSC) News News items ▾ Press releases ▾ News flashes ▾ Newsletter "JSC News" Events ▾ Calendar ▾ Training courses ▾ Seminars, colloquia, and talks ▾ Workshops, schools & conferences ▾ Exhibitions Social Media Research Strategic research domains ▾ Materials science ▾ Neuroscience ▾ Earth system science ▾ Quantum computing Further research domains ▾ Biology ▾ Plasma physics ▾ Fluids & solids engineering ▾ Elementary particle, nuclear and astrophysics Cross-domain research ▾ System architecture design ▾ Enabling data-intensive science ▾ Cross-domain HPC application support ▾ Mathematical models and methods ▾ Artificial Intelligence – Research and Application Projects ▾ Highlight projects ▾ EU-funded projects ▾ BMBF-funded projects ▾ NRW-funded projects ▾ DFG/DAAD-funded projects ▾ Other funding Publications ▾ Highlight publications ▾ Publications by year ▾ Publications by author ▾ Journal articles ▾ Contributions to proceedings ▾ Books, reports ▾ Theses ▾ Software ▾ IAS Series Systems Supercomputers ▾ JUPITER ▾ JUWELS ▾ JURECA ▾ JUSUF ▾ Apply for test access ▾ Apply for computing time ▾ Calls for proposals ▾ Research fields and origin of users ▾ Contact Prototype systems ▾ DEEP system Quantum computing ▾ JUNIQ facility ▾ JUNIQ access, service & support Storage systems ▾ JUST ▾ JUDAC ▾ dCache Scientific clouds ▾ JSC Cloud Services User Support ▾ Getting access to systems ▾ Using systems ▾ Project mentoring ▾ Software & Tools ▾ Advanced topics ▾ JSC HPC Support Corner Data services ▾ Data projects ▾ Generic services ▾ Community data services ▾ Processing personal data Scientific communities ▾ Simulation and Data Labs ▾ Jülich CECAM node ▾ Special community services Industry relations ▾ Existing relations ▾ Get in contact ▾ AI Consulting for Industry and Public Sector Network services (FZJ-internal) ▾ Computer registration for JuNet ▾ Virtual Private Network (VPN) ▾ WLAN ▾ Cabling order ▾ Certificates ▾ Video and web conferences via DFN ▾ IT security ▾ Documentation System Services ▾ Software Tools Education Trainees & Bachelor students ▾ MaTSE Training with dual Bachelor Course Master students ▾ Master course Applied Mathematics and Computer Science ▾ Guest student programme ▾ PRACE Summer of HPC ▾ Open positions for students Doctoral researchers ▾ Open positions for doctoral researchers Training courses for users ▾ Course calendar ▾ Training Materials ▾ Request course resources (for course instructors) About us Profile ▾ Staff ▾ Professorships ▾ Awards ▾ How to reach us ▾ Cooperations Structure ▾ Organizational chart ▾ Divisions ▾ Research groups ▾ Simulation and Data Labs ▾ Algorithms, Tools and Methods Labs Contacts ▾ Director, JSC Office ▾ Administration ▾ User support ▾ Industry relations, cooperations ▾ MaTSE, study courses Job offers ▾ Professionals ▾ PhD candidates ▾ University students UNLEASHING NEXT-GEN COMPUTING POWER at Jülich Supercomputing Centre More than 350 employees in research, teaching and infrastructure 1000000000000000000 calculations per second (with exascale system JUPITER) More than 5,000 qubits (in the D-Wave Advantage™ system JUPSI) Director: Prof. Dr. Dr. Thomas Lippert & Prof. Dr. Kristel Michielsen JUNIQ facility The Jülich UNified Infrastructure for Quantum computing provides science and industry access to state-of-the-art quantum computing devices. JUPITER - Exascale for Europe Forschungszentrum Jülich is home to Europe’s first exascale supercomputer, JUPITER. It is the first computer in Europe to surpass the threshold of one quintillion (“1” followed by 18 zeros) calculations per second. Supercomputers Jülich Supercomputing Centre operates computers of the highest performance class. The supercomputers JUPITER and JUWELS are currently among the most powerful supercomputers in the world. JUNIQ facility The Jülich UNified Infrastructure for Quantum computing provides science and industry access to state-of-the-art quantum computing devices. JUPITER - Exascale for Europe Forschungszentrum Jülich is home to Europe’s first exascale supercomputer, JUPITER. It is the first computer in Europe to surpass the threshold of one quintillion (“1” followed by 18 zeros) calculations per second. Supercomputers Jülich Supercomputing Centre operates computers of the highest performance class. The supercomputers JUPITER and JUWELS are currently among the most powerful supercomputers in the world. JUNIQ facility The Jülich UNified Infrastructure for Quantum computing provides science and industry access to state-of-the-art quantum computing devices. 1 2 3 Jülich-Aachen Start-up Paves the Way for Scalable Quantum Computers Ericsson and Forschungszentrum Jülich to develop advanced AI for 6G ICON Team Wins Gordon Bell Prize for Climate Modelling Europe’s First Supercomputer Reaches 1 ExaFLOP/s New Record on JUPITER: Simulating a 50-Qubit Quantum Computer Computing With Light: Forschungszentrum Jülich and Q.ANT Launch Collaboration on Photonic Computing Inauguration of Jade and Ruby Quantum Processors: Milestone towards a hybrid high-performance computing and quantum simulator infrastructure for Europe JSC at SC25 in St. Louis Summer, Sunshine & Supercomputing – Curious Crowds Flocked to JSC at "Tag der Neugier" Grand ceremony marks the launch of the Exascale Supercomputer JUPITER JUPITER Supercomputer Propels European Computing Power EU Commissioner Henna Virkkunen Visits Forschungszentrum Jülich Forschungszentrum Jülich strengthens quantum research with purchase of D-WaveTM annealing quantum computer 1 2 3 4 5 More News Research groups JSC hosts several research groups in various research fields, form quantum information processing, earth system science, structural biology, supercomputing architecture and mathematics. More Simulation and Data Labs (JSC) has introduced a special form of high-level support structure: the Simulation and Data Laboratory (SDL). Around ten such teams have been established at JSC specializing in various disciplines including Biology, Neuroscience, Molecular Systems, Plasma Physics, Earth Science, Quantum Materials Science, Fluid Dynamics and Astrophysics. Their purpose is to assist user groups in refactoring domain-specific computational & data-intensive applications in order to enhance performance efficiency and scalability at all concurrency levels on modern, heterogeneous architectures. More Algorithms, Tools and Methods Labs The cross-domain Algorithms, Tools and Methods Labs (ATMLs) are interdisciplinary teams of scientists performing research and development on and providing training in generic, cross-domain areas. This also includes the development of original algorithms, tools and methods. Typically, an ATML addresses overarching topics such as numerical algorithms, machine learning or parallel performance tools, that are key to enabling computational & data-intensive science and for transforming data into knowledge. More JSC hosts several research groups in various research fields, form quantum information processing, earth system science, structural biology, supercomputing architecture and mathematics. More Supercomputers JUPITER - Exascale for Europe JUWELS JURECA JUSUF Quantum Computing JUNIQ facility D-Wave Advantage™ System JUPSI Quantum Information Processing (QIP) print to the top Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH Wilhelm-Johnen-Straße 52428 Jülich 02461 61-0 02461 61-8100 Directions Jülich News The monthly update from Forschungszentrum Jülich © Forschungszentrum Jülich Legal Notice Data Protection Accessibility Compliance  <!-- 截断至 50K 字符 -->
